README.md, before:

# Battery Cutoff Monitor - ESP32

Automatic battery protection system that disconnects your load when voltage gets too low and reconnects when voltage recovers.

## Circuit Diagram

View the complete wiring diagram here: [Cirkit Designer - Battery Monitor Wiring](https://app.cirkitdesigner.com/project/de4b9459-3ebd-45a3-887c-bb5d5f185a88)

View the complete wiring documentation here: [Circuit Docs](https://github.com/Environmental-Dashboard/-Battery-Cutoff-Monitor/blob/main/CIRCUIT_DOCUMENTATION.md)

---

## What It Does

Monitors your battery voltage continuously. Uses two thresholds to protect your battery:
- Turns OFF when voltage drops to or below cutoff (default: 12.0V)
- Turns ON when voltage rises to or above reconnect (default: 12.9V)

**Current Default Settings:**
- Cutoff (lower): 12.0V - turns OFF at or below this voltage
- Reconnect (upper): 12.9V - turns ON at or above this voltage
- Relay Type: NO (Normally Open)
- Relay Pin: GPIO27

---

## Parts Needed

| Part | Specification |
|------|---------------|
| ESP32 board | Any ESP32 development board |
| Relay module | 5V relay with NO contact |
| Top resistor | 100kΩ (Brown-Black-Yellow) |
| Bottom resistor | 10kΩ (Brown-Black-Orange) |
| Capacitor | 0.1µF to 1µF ceramic |
| Battery | 8V-16V (tested with 12.8V LiFePO4) |
| Wires | Jumper wires and power wires |

---

## Wiring Instructions

### A. Battery Voltage Measurement (Voltage Divider)

```
Battery + ──→ 100kΩ resistor ──→ [Connection Point] ──→ 10kΩ resistor ──→ GND
                                          ↓
                                      GPIO36 (VP)
                                          ↓
                                   Capacitor to GND
```

The resistors divide the battery voltage down to a safe level (0-3.3V) for the ESP32 ADC input.

### B. Relay Connection (NO Terminal)

```
Power Supply + ──→ Relay COM terminal
Relay NO terminal ──→ Your Load +
Load GND ──→ Common GND
```

**How NO (Normally Open) works:**
- Relay OFF = NO contact open = Load has no power
- Relay ON = NO contact closed = Load gets power

### C. Relay Control from ESP32

```
ESP32 GPIO27 ──→ Relay IN pin
ESP32 GND ──→ Relay GND
5V supply ──→ Relay VCC
```

### D. ESP32 Power

```
5V power supply ──→ ESP32 VIN
GND ──→ ESP32 GND
```

### IMPORTANT: Common Ground

All grounds must be connected together:
- Battery negative
- ESP32 GND
- Relay GND  
- Load GND
- Power supply GND

---

## Software Setup

### Step 1: Install Arduino IDE

Download from: https://www.arduino.cc/en/software

### Step 2: Add ESP32 Board Support

1. Open Arduino IDE
2. File → Preferences
3. Add this URL to "Additional Board Manager URLs":
   ```
   https://raw.githubusercontent.com/espressif/arduino-esp32/gh-pages/package_esp32_index.json
   ```
4. Tools → Board → Boards Manager
5. Search "ESP32" and install

### Step 3: Configure WiFi Credentials

Open `voltage_meter.ino` and edit line 61:

```cpp
const char* WIFI_SSID = "YourWiFiName";
const char* WIFI_PASS = "YourPassword";
```

### Step 4: Upload Code

1. Connect ESP32 to computer with USB cable
2. Tools → Board → "ESP32 Dev Module"
3. Tools → Port → Select your port (e.g., /dev/cu.usbserial-0001)
4. Tools → Upload Speed → "115200"
5. Click Upload button
6. If it says "Connecting...", hold the BOOT button on ESP32
7. Wait for "Done uploading"

### Step 5: Get IP Address

1. Tools → Serial Monitor
2. Set baud rate to 115200
3. Press RESET button on ESP32
4. Note the IP address printed (e.g., 10.17.195.65)
5. Open that IP in your web browser

---

## How To Calibrate ADC (One-Time Setup Per Device)

**EASIEST METHOD - Auto-Calibration:**

1. Measure actual battery voltage with multimeter (e.g., 13.5V)
2. Send this command:
   ```
   http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?target=13.5
   ```
3. Done! The code automatically calculates and saves calibration.

**Calibration persists across reboots** - you only need to do this once per device.

**For multiple devices:** Upload same code to all, then calibrate each one:
- Device 1: `http://10.17.195.65/settings?target=13.5`
- Device 2: `http://10.17.195.66/settings?target=13.5`
- Device 3: `http://10.17.195.67/settings?target=13.5`

Each device saves its own calibration automatically. No code changes needed!

---

## How To Change Voltage Thresholds

### Method 1: Edit the Code (Permanent Change)

Open `voltage_meter.ino` and find line 147:

```cpp
float V_CUTOFF = 12.0;     // Turn OFF at this voltage
float V_RECONNECT = 12.9;  // Turn ON at this voltage
```

Change the values to what you need, then upload the code again.

**Example 1: For 12V Lead Acid Battery**
```cpp
float V_CUTOFF = 11.5;     // Protect battery at 11.5V
float V_RECONNECT = 12.4;  // Reconnect at 12.4V
```

**Example 2: Allow More Battery Discharge**
```cpp
float V_CUTOFF = 11.0;     // Use more capacity before cutoff
float V_RECONNECT = 12.0;  // Resume at 12V
```

**Example 3: Conservative Protection**
```cpp
float V_CUTOFF = 12.5;     // Cut off early to preserve battery
float V_RECONNECT = 13.2;  // Wait for full charge
```

### Method 2: Change via Web API (Temporary Until Restart)

Send HTTP request to change thresholds on the fly:

**Set cutoff to 11V and reconnect to 12V:**
```
http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?lower=11.0&upper=12.0
```

**Just change cutoff:**
```
http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?lower=11.0
```

**Just change reconnect:**
```
http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?upper=12.5
```

**Example with curl:**
```bash
curl "http://10.17.195.65/settings?lower=11.0&upper=12.0"
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "v_cutoff": 11.00,
  "v_reconnect": 12.00,
  "calibration_factor": 1.0000,
  "changed": true
}
```

**Calibrate ADC (adjust voltage readings):**
```
GET http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?calibrate=1.016
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "v_cutoff": 11.00,
  "v_reconnect": 12.90,
  "calibration_factor": 1.0160,
  "changed": true
}
```

**The system immediately re-evaluates:**
- If current voltage ≤ new cutoff → load turns OFF instantly
- If current voltage ≥ new reconnect → load turns ON instantly
- Otherwise → load stays in current state

---

## Web Dashboard

Open your browser to the ESP32 IP address (e.g., http://10.17.195.65)

**Dashboard shows:**
- Current battery voltage (updates every second)
- Load status (ON or OFF with color indicator)
- Control mode (AUTO or MANUAL)
- Current cutoff threshold
- Current reconnect threshold

**Control buttons:**
- Auto - Automatic control based on voltage thresholds
- Force ON - Manually turn load ON (ignores voltage)
- Force OFF - Manually turn load OFF

---

## How The Control Logic Works

**In AUTO mode (Two-Threshold Hysteresis):**
- If voltage ≤ cutoff (lower threshold) → Load turns **OFF**
- If voltage ≥ reconnect (upper threshold) → Load turns **ON**
- If voltage is between thresholds → Load stays in current state

**Example with cutoff=12.0V and reconnect=12.9V:**
- Battery at 13.0V → Load ON (above reconnect)
- Voltage drops to 12.5V → Load stays ON (between thresholds)
- Voltage drops to 12.0V → Load turns OFF (at or below cutoff)
- Voltage at 12.3V → Load stays OFF (between thresholds)
- Voltage rises to 12.9V → Load turns ON (at or above reconnect)

**When you change thresholds via web API:**
The system immediately checks the new thresholds against current voltage:
- If voltage ≤ new cutoff → turns OFF instantly
- If voltage ≥ new reconnect → turns ON instantly
- Otherwise stays in current state

**Why two thresholds?**
Prevents rapid on/off cycling when voltage hovers near one value. The gap between cutoff and reconnect ensures the battery must fully recover before the load reconnects.

---

## JSON API For External Programs

**Get current status:**
```
GET http://[ESP32-IP]/status.json
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "voltage_v": 11.63,
  "load_on": false,
  "auto_mode": true,
  "uptime_ms": 123456,
  "v_cutoff": 11.00,
  "v_reconnect": 12.90,
  "calibration_factor": 1.0000,
  "cycle_count": 42,
  "turn_on_count_48h": 15,
  "last_switch_time_ms": 123000
}
```

**Field descriptions:**
- `voltage_v`: Current battery voltage in volts
- `load_on`: Current load state (true = ON, false = OFF)
- `auto_mode`: Control mode (true = automatic, false = manual)
- `v_cutoff`: Lower threshold voltage (turns OFF at or below this)
- `v_reconnect`: Upper threshold voltage (turns ON at or above this)
- `calibration_factor`: ADC calibration factor (1.0 = no calibration)
- `cycle_count`: Number of times load has turned ON (resets at 10,000)
- `turn_on_count_48h`: Number of times load turned ON in the last 48 hours
- `last_switch_time_ms`: Timestamp (milliseconds since boot) of last relay state change
- `uptime_ms`: System uptime in milliseconds

**Change thresholds:**
```
GET http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?lower=11.0&upper=12.5
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "v_cutoff": 11.00,
  "v_reconnect": 12.50,
  "calibration_factor": 1.1937,
  "changed": true
}
```

**Calibrate ADC (Auto-calibration - EASIEST METHOD):**
```
GET http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?target=13.5
```
Just provide the voltage from your multimeter - the code calculates and sets calibration automatically!

**Response:**
```json
{
  "v_cutoff": 12.00,
  "v_reconnect": 12.90,
  "calibration_factor": 1.1937,
  "changed": true
}
```

**Calibrate ADC (Manual - if you know the factor):**
```
GET http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?calibrate=1.1937
```
Use this if you've already calculated the calibration factor manually.

**Control relay:**
```
GET http://[ESP32-IP]/relay?auto=1      (enable auto mode)
GET http://[ESP32-IP]/relay?on=1        (force load ON)
GET http://[ESP32-IP]/relay?on=0        (force load OFF)
```

**Get cycle statistics:**
The `/status.json` endpoint includes cycle tracking:
- `cycle_count`: Total number of times load has turned ON (increments each turn-ON, resets at 10,000)
- `turn_on_count_48h`: Number of times load turned ON in the last 48 hours
- `last_switch_time_ms`: Timestamp of last relay state change (milliseconds since boot)

**Example: Get cycle count:**
```bash
curl http://10.17.195.65/status.json | jq '.cycle_count'
```

**Example: Get 48-hour turn-on frequency:**
```bash
curl http://10.17.195.65/status.json | jq '.turn_on_count_48h'
```

**Example: Get last switch time (convert to readable format):**
```bash
# Get timestamp
TIMESTAMP=$(curl -s http://10.17.195.65/status.json | jq '.last_switch_time_ms')
# Convert to seconds and display (if you have date command)
date -r $((TIMESTAMP / 1000))
```

---

## Troubleshooting

### Wrong Voltage Reading

**Problem:** Displayed voltage doesn't match multimeter

**Fix 1: Calibrate the ADC**

The ESP32 ADC reference voltage varies from chip to chip (1000mV to 1200mV), causing reading inaccuracies. Calibrate using these steps:

1. Measure actual battery voltage with a multimeter (e.g., 12.50V)
2. Check displayed voltage on web interface (e.g., 12.30V)
3. Calculate calibration factor:
   ```
   factor = measured_voltage / displayed_voltage
   factor = 12.50 / 12.30 = 1.016
   ```
4. Set calibration via web API:
   ```
   http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?calibrate=1.016
   ```
5. Verify: Display should now show ~12.50V

**Fix 2: Verify resistor values**

If calibration doesn't help, check resistor values. Measure each resistor with multimeter:
- Top resistor should be 100kΩ (Brown-Black-Yellow)
- Bottom resistor should be 10kΩ (Brown-Black-Orange)

If your resistors are different, update line 82 in the code:
```cpp
const float RTOP = 100000.0;  // Change to your measured value
const float RBOT = 10000.0;   // Change to your measured value
```

### Voltage Reading Too High (36V or maxed out)

**Problem:** Reading shows impossible voltage like 36V

**Fix:** The resistors are likely swapped. Check that:
- 100kΩ resistor connects Battery+ to ADC point
- 10kΩ resistor connects ADC point to GND
- NOT the other way around

### Voltage Jumps Around

**Problem:** Voltage reading is unstable or noisy

**Fix:**
- Add larger capacitor (1µF instead of 0.1µF)
- Keep voltage divider wires short
- Check all connections are solid
- Move voltage divider away from noisy components

### Relay Doesn't Click

**Problem:** Relay never activates

**Fix:**
- Check relay VCC pin has 5V power
- Verify GPIO27 connects to relay IN pin
- Check relay GND connects to ESP32 GND
- Test relay manually by connecting IN pin directly to GND

### Load Doesn't Turn On

**Problem:** Relay clicks but load has no power

**Fix:**
- Verify using NO terminal on relay, not NC
- Check COM terminal has power supply connected
- Check NO terminal connects to load positive
- Verify load GND connects to common ground
- Try "Force ON" button on web page

### Can't Upload Code

**Problem:** Upload fails with serial errors

**Fix:**
- Close Serial Monitor before uploading
- Try different USB cable
- Use /dev/tty.usbserial-* port instead of /dev/cu.*
- Hold BOOT button during upload
- Check nothing else (Chrome, etc.) is using the serial port:
  ```bash
  lsof | grep usbserial
  ```

---

## Technical Specifications

| Parameter | Value |
|-----------|-------|
| Input voltage range | 8V - 16V |
| ADC resolution | 12-bit (0-4095) |
| ADC pin | GPIO36 (VP, ADC1_CH0) |
| Relay control pin | GPIO27 |
| Relay type | NO (Normally Open) |
| Voltage measurement rate | 4 Hz (every 250ms) |
| Web update rate | 1 Hz (every 1 second) |
| Smoothing | 150 sample average + 20 point moving average |
| ADC calibration | Adjustable factor (default 1.0) |
| WiFi | 2.4GHz only (ESP32 limitation) |

---

## Voltage Divider Calculation

**Formula:**
```
V_adc = V_battery × (R_bottom / (R_top + R_bottom))
```

**With 100kΩ top and 10kΩ bottom:**
```
V_adc = V_battery × (10000 / (100000 + 10000))
V_adc = V_battery × 0.0909
V_adc = V_battery / 11
```

**Safety check for 14.6V max (charging voltage):**
```
V_adc_max = 14.6V / 11 = 1.33V
```

This is well below the 3.3V maximum for ESP32 ADC. Safe operation confirmed.

---

## Safety Notes

1. Check battery voltage rating before connecting
2. Connect all grounds together (battery, ESP32, relay, load)
3. Verify relay current rating matches your load
4. Use appropriate wire gauge for load current
5. Test voltage reading with multimeter before connecting load
6. Never short circuit battery terminals
7. Double-check wiring before powering on

---

## Files

- `voltage_meter.ino` - Main Arduino code
- `README.md` - This documentation  
- `circuit_diagram.png` - Circuit wiring photo
- `CIRCUIT_DOCUMENTATION.md` - Detailed technical documentation

---

## License

Open source. Free to use and modify.

---

**GitHub:** https://github.com/Environmental-Dashboard/-Battery-Cutoff-Monitor

Commit message:

Update troubleshooting section with auto-calibration
- Auto-calibration now listed as Fix 1 (easiest method)
- Manual calibration as Fix 2 (for reference)
- Resistor verification moved to Fix 3

README.md, after:

# Battery Cutoff Monitor - ESP32

Automatic battery protection system that disconnects your load when voltage gets too low and reconnects when voltage recovers.

## Circuit Diagram

View the complete wiring diagram here: [Cirkit Designer - Battery Monitor Wiring](https://app.cirkitdesigner.com/project/de4b9459-3ebd-45a3-887c-bb5d5f185a88)

View the complete wiring documentation here: [Circuit Docs](https://github.com/Environmental-Dashboard/-Battery-Cutoff-Monitor/blob/main/CIRCUIT_DOCUMENTATION.md)

---

## What It Does

Monitors your battery voltage continuously. Uses two thresholds to protect your battery:
- Turns OFF when voltage drops to or below cutoff (default: 12.0V)
- Turns ON when voltage rises to or above reconnect (default: 12.9V)

**Current Default Settings:**
- Cutoff (lower): 12.0V - turns OFF at or below this voltage
- Reconnect (upper): 12.9V - turns ON at or above this voltage
- Relay Type: NO (Normally Open)
- Relay Pin: GPIO27

---

## Parts Needed

| Part | Specification |
|------|---------------|
| ESP32 board | Any ESP32 development board |
| Relay module | 5V relay with NO contact |
| Top resistor | 100kΩ (Brown-Black-Yellow) |
| Bottom resistor | 10kΩ (Brown-Black-Orange) |
| Capacitor | 0.1µF to 1µF ceramic |
| Battery | 8V-16V (tested with 12.8V LiFePO4) |
| Wires | Jumper wires and power wires |

---

## Wiring Instructions

### A. Battery Voltage Measurement (Voltage Divider)

```
Battery + ──→ 100kΩ resistor ──→ [Connection Point] ──→ 10kΩ resistor ──→ GND
                                          ↓
                                      GPIO36 (VP)
                                          ↓
                                   Capacitor to GND
```

The resistors divide the battery voltage down to a safe level (0-3.3V) for the ESP32 ADC input.

### B. Relay Connection (NO Terminal)

```
Power Supply + ──→ Relay COM terminal
Relay NO terminal ──→ Your Load +
Load GND ──→ Common GND
```

**How NO (Normally Open) works:**
- Relay OFF = NO contact open = Load has no power
- Relay ON = NO contact closed = Load gets power

### C. Relay Control from ESP32

```
ESP32 GPIO27 ──→ Relay IN pin
ESP32 GND ──→ Relay GND
5V supply ──→ Relay VCC
```

### D. ESP32 Power

```
5V power supply ──→ ESP32 VIN
GND ──→ ESP32 GND
```

### IMPORTANT: Common Ground

All grounds must be connected together:
- Battery negative
- ESP32 GND
- Relay GND  
- Load GND
- Power supply GND

---

## Software Setup

### Step 1: Install Arduino IDE

Download from: https://www.arduino.cc/en/software

### Step 2: Add ESP32 Board Support

1. Open Arduino IDE
2. File → Preferences
3. Add this URL to "Additional Board Manager URLs":
   ```
   https://raw.githubusercontent.com/espressif/arduino-esp32/gh-pages/package_esp32_index.json
   ```
4. Tools → Board → Boards Manager
5. Search "ESP32" and install

### Step 3: Configure WiFi Credentials

Open `voltage_meter.ino` and edit line 61:

```cpp
const char* WIFI_SSID = "YourWiFiName";
const char* WIFI_PASS = "YourPassword";
```

### Step 4: Upload Code

1. Connect ESP32 to computer with USB cable
2. Tools → Board → "ESP32 Dev Module"
3. Tools → Port → Select your port (e.g., /dev/cu.usbserial-0001)
4. Tools → Upload Speed → "115200"
5. Click Upload button
6. If it says "Connecting...", hold the BOOT button on ESP32
7. Wait for "Done uploading"

### Step 5: Get IP Address

1. Tools → Serial Monitor
2. Set baud rate to 115200
3. Press RESET button on ESP32
4. Note the IP address printed (e.g., 10.17.195.65)
5. Open that IP in your web browser

---

## How To Calibrate ADC (One-Time Setup Per Device)

**EASIEST METHOD - Auto-Calibration:**

1. Measure actual battery voltage with multimeter (e.g., 13.5V)
2. Send this command:
   ```
   http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?target=13.5
   ```
3. Done! The code automatically calculates and saves calibration.

**Calibration persists across reboots** - you only need to do this once per device.

**For multiple devices:** Upload same code to all, then calibrate each one:
- Device 1: `http://10.17.195.65/settings?target=13.5`
- Device 2: `http://10.17.195.66/settings?target=13.5`
- Device 3: `http://10.17.195.67/settings?target=13.5`

Each device saves its own calibration automatically. No code changes needed!

---

## How To Change Voltage Thresholds

### Method 1: Edit the Code (Permanent Change)

Open `voltage_meter.ino` and find line 147:

```cpp
float V_CUTOFF = 12.0;     // Turn OFF at this voltage
float V_RECONNECT = 12.9;  // Turn ON at this voltage
```

Change the values to what you need, then upload the code again.

**Example 1: For 12V Lead Acid Battery**
```cpp
float V_CUTOFF = 11.5;     // Protect battery at 11.5V
float V_RECONNECT = 12.4;  // Reconnect at 12.4V
```

**Example 2: Allow More Battery Discharge**
```cpp
float V_CUTOFF = 11.0;     // Use more capacity before cutoff
float V_RECONNECT = 12.0;  // Resume at 12V
```

**Example 3: Conservative Protection**
```cpp
float V_CUTOFF = 12.5;     // Cut off early to preserve battery
float V_RECONNECT = 13.2;  // Wait for full charge
```

### Method 2: Change via Web API (Temporary Until Restart)

Send HTTP request to change thresholds on the fly:

**Set cutoff to 11V and reconnect to 12V:**
```
http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?lower=11.0&upper=12.0
```

**Just change cutoff:**
```
http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?lower=11.0
```

**Just change reconnect:**
```
http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?upper=12.5
```

**Example with curl:**
```bash
curl "http://10.17.195.65/settings?lower=11.0&upper=12.0"
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "v_cutoff": 11.00,
  "v_reconnect": 12.00,
  "calibration_factor": 1.0000,
  "changed": true
}
```

**Calibrate ADC (adjust voltage readings):**
```
GET http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?calibrate=1.016
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "v_cutoff": 11.00,
  "v_reconnect": 12.90,
  "calibration_factor": 1.0160,
  "changed": true
}
```

**The system immediately re-evaluates:**
- If current voltage ≤ new cutoff → load turns OFF instantly
- If current voltage ≥ new reconnect → load turns ON instantly
- Otherwise → load stays in current state

---

## Web Dashboard

Open your browser to the ESP32 IP address (e.g., http://10.17.195.65)

**Dashboard shows:**
- Current battery voltage (updates every second)
- Load status (ON or OFF with color indicator)
- Control mode (AUTO or MANUAL)
- Current cutoff threshold
- Current reconnect threshold

**Control buttons:**
- Auto - Automatic control based on voltage thresholds
- Force ON - Manually turn load ON (ignores voltage)
- Force OFF - Manually turn load OFF

---

## How The Control Logic Works

**In AUTO mode (Two-Threshold Hysteresis):**
- If voltage ≤ cutoff (lower threshold) → Load turns **OFF**
- If voltage ≥ reconnect (upper threshold) → Load turns **ON**
- If voltage is between thresholds → Load stays in current state

**Example with cutoff=12.0V and reconnect=12.9V:**
- Battery at 13.0V → Load ON (above reconnect)
- Voltage drops to 12.5V → Load stays ON (between thresholds)
- Voltage drops to 12.0V → Load turns OFF (at or below cutoff)
- Voltage at 12.3V → Load stays OFF (between thresholds)
- Voltage rises to 12.9V → Load turns ON (at or above reconnect)

**When you change thresholds via web API:**
The system immediately checks the new thresholds against current voltage:
- If voltage ≤ new cutoff → turns OFF instantly
- If voltage ≥ new reconnect → turns ON instantly
- Otherwise stays in current state

**Why two thresholds?**
Prevents rapid on/off cycling when voltage hovers near one value. The gap between cutoff and reconnect ensures the battery must fully recover before the load reconnects.

---

## JSON API For External Programs

**Get current status:**
```
GET http://[ESP32-IP]/status.json
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "voltage_v": 11.63,
  "load_on": false,
  "auto_mode": true,
  "uptime_ms": 123456,
  "v_cutoff": 11.00,
  "v_reconnect": 12.90,
  "calibration_factor": 1.0000,
  "cycle_count": 42,
  "turn_on_count_48h": 15,
  "last_switch_time_ms": 123000
}
```

**Field descriptions:**
- `voltage_v`: Current battery voltage in volts
- `load_on`: Current load state (true = ON, false = OFF)
- `auto_mode`: Control mode (true = automatic, false = manual)
- `v_cutoff`: Lower threshold voltage (turns OFF at or below this)
- `v_reconnect`: Upper threshold voltage (turns ON at or above this)
- `calibration_factor`: ADC calibration factor (1.0 = no calibration)
- `cycle_count`: Number of times load has turned ON (resets at 10,000)
- `turn_on_count_48h`: Number of times load turned ON in the last 48 hours
- `last_switch_time_ms`: Timestamp (milliseconds since boot) of last relay state change
- `uptime_ms`: System uptime in milliseconds

**Change thresholds:**
```
GET http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?lower=11.0&upper=12.5
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "v_cutoff": 11.00,
  "v_reconnect": 12.50,
  "calibration_factor": 1.1937,
  "changed": true
}
```

**Calibrate ADC (Auto-calibration - EASIEST METHOD):**
```
GET http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?target=13.5
```
Just provide the voltage from your multimeter - the code calculates and sets calibration automatically!

**Response:**
```json
{
  "v_cutoff": 12.00,
  "v_reconnect": 12.90,
  "calibration_factor": 1.1937,
  "changed": true
}
```

**Calibrate ADC (Manual - if you know the factor):**
```
GET http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?calibrate=1.1937
```
Use this if you've already calculated the calibration factor manually.

**Control relay:**
```
GET http://[ESP32-IP]/relay?auto=1      (enable auto mode)
GET http://[ESP32-IP]/relay?on=1        (force load ON)
GET http://[ESP32-IP]/relay?on=0        (force load OFF)
```

**Get cycle statistics:**
The `/status.json` endpoint includes cycle tracking:
- `cycle_count`: Total number of times load has turned ON (increments each turn-ON, resets at 10,000)
- `turn_on_count_48h`: Number of times load turned ON in the last 48 hours
- `last_switch_time_ms`: Timestamp of last relay state change (milliseconds since boot)

**Example: Get cycle count:**
```bash
curl http://10.17.195.65/status.json | jq '.cycle_count'
```

**Example: Get 48-hour turn-on frequency:**
```bash
curl http://10.17.195.65/status.json | jq '.turn_on_count_48h'
```

**Example: Get last switch time (convert to readable format):**
```bash
# Get timestamp
TIMESTAMP=$(curl -s http://10.17.195.65/status.json | jq '.last_switch_time_ms')
# Convert to seconds and display (if you have date command)
date -r $((TIMESTAMP / 1000))
```

---

## Troubleshooting

### Wrong Voltage Reading

**Problem:** Displayed voltage doesn't match multimeter

**Fix 1: Auto-Calibrate the ADC (EASIEST METHOD)**

The ESP32 ADC reference voltage varies from chip to chip (1000mV to 1200mV), causing reading inaccuracies. Use auto-calibration:

1. Measure actual battery voltage with a multimeter (e.g., 13.5V)
2. Set calibration automatically:
   ```
   http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?target=13.5
   ```
   The code automatically calculates and sets the calibration factor!
3. Verify: Display should now show ~13.5V
4. Calibration is saved automatically and persists after reboot

**Fix 2: Manual Calibration (if you prefer)**

1. Measure actual battery voltage with a multimeter (e.g., 13.5V)
2. Check displayed voltage on web interface (e.g., 11.8V)
3. Calculate calibration factor:
   ```
   factor = measured_voltage / displayed_voltage
   factor = 13.5 / 11.8 = 1.1441
   ```
4. Set calibration via web API:
   ```
   http://[ESP32-IP]/settings?calibrate=1.1441
   ```
5. Verify: Display should now show ~13.5V

**Fix 3: Verify resistor values**

If calibration doesn't help, check resistor values. Measure each resistor with multimeter:
- Top resistor should be 100kΩ (Brown-Black-Yellow)
- Bottom resistor should be 10kΩ (Brown-Black-Orange)

If your resistors are different, update line 82 in the code:
```cpp
const float RTOP = 100000.0;  // Change to your measured value
const float RBOT = 10000.0;   // Change to your measured value
```

### Voltage Reading Too High (36V or maxed out)

**Problem:** Reading shows impossible voltage like 36V

**Fix:** The resistors are likely swapped. Check that:
- 100kΩ resistor connects Battery+ to ADC point
- 10kΩ resistor connects ADC point to GND
- NOT the other way around

### Voltage Jumps Around

**Problem:** Voltage reading is unstable or noisy

**Fix:**
- Add larger capacitor (1µF instead of 0.1µF)
- Keep voltage divider wires short
- Check all connections are solid
- Move voltage divider away from noisy components

### Relay Doesn't Click

**Problem:** Relay never activates

**Fix:**
- Check relay VCC pin has 5V power
- Verify GPIO27 connects to relay IN pin
- Check relay GND connects to ESP32 GND
- Test relay manually by connecting IN pin directly to GND

### Load Doesn't Turn On

**Problem:** Relay clicks but load has no power

**Fix:**
- Verify using NO terminal on relay, not NC
- Check COM terminal has power supply connected
- Check NO terminal connects to load positive
- Verify load GND connects to common ground
- Try "Force ON" button on web page

### Can't Upload Code

**Problem:** Upload fails with serial errors

**Fix:**
- Close Serial Monitor before uploading
- Try different USB cable
- Use /dev/tty.usbserial-* port instead of /dev/cu.*
- Hold BOOT button during upload
- Check nothing else (Chrome, etc.) is using the serial port:
  ```bash
  lsof | grep usbserial
  ```

---

## Technical Specifications

| Parameter | Value |
|-----------|-------|
| Input voltage range | 8V - 16V |
| ADC resolution | 12-bit (0-4095) |
| ADC pin | GPIO36 (VP, ADC1_CH0) |
| Relay control pin | GPIO27 |
| Relay type | NO (Normally Open) |
| Voltage measurement rate | 4 Hz (every 250ms) |
| Web update rate | 1 Hz (every 1 second) |
| Smoothing | 150 sample average + 20 point moving average |
| ADC calibration | Adjustable factor (default 1.0) |
| WiFi | 2.4GHz only (ESP32 limitation) |

---

## Voltage Divider Calculation

**Formula:**
```
V_adc = V_battery × (R_bottom / (R_top + R_bottom))
```

**With 100kΩ top and 10kΩ bottom:**
```
V_adc = V_battery × (10000 / (100000 + 10000))
V_adc = V_battery × 0.0909
V_adc = V_battery / 11
```

**Safety check for 14.6V max (charging voltage):**
```
V_adc_max = 14.6V / 11 = 1.33V
```

This is well below the 3.3V maximum for ESP32 ADC. Safe operation confirmed.

---

## Safety Notes

1. Check battery voltage rating before connecting
2. Connect all grounds together (battery, ESP32, relay, load)
3. Verify relay current rating matches your load
4. Use appropriate wire gauge for load current
5. Test voltage reading with multimeter before connecting load
6. Never short circuit battery terminals
7. Double-check wiring before powering on

---

## Files

- `voltage_meter.ino` - Main Arduino code
- `README.md` - This documentation  
- `circuit_diagram.png` - Circuit wiring photo
- `CIRCUIT_DOCUMENTATION.md` - Detailed technical documentation

---

## License

Open source. Free to use and modify.

---

**GitHub:** https://github.com/Environmental-Dashboard/-Battery-Cutoff-Monitor
